blog_title: What does the car in 2035 look like? blog_publication date:
Dec 21, 2023 blog_author: Arjun Singh blog_url:
https://medium.com/99p-labs/car-at-2035-55ab8470404b

*The article is a reflection of the capstone undertaken by the master's
students (*[*Adri*](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adrimr/)*,*
[*Arjun*](https://www.linkedin.com/in/arjunsinghkumar/)*,*
[*Bonny*](https://www.linkedin.com/in/bonnyphilip/)*,*
[*Charu*](https://www.linkedin.com/in/charu-dixit/)*,*
[*Eshaan*](https://www.linkedin.com/in/eshaanrampal/)*) in the Product
Management Program at the Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon
University in collaboration with 99P Labs for developing a product
vision for auto manufacturers under the guidance of Ryan Lingo, Kent
Broestl and*

*.*

## 1.0 Problem Statement

**Transforming cars that have traditionally been considered a liability,
into an asset by generating greater value and reducing the cost of
ownership**

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/1*K0AOISZGqUFP_PCKQPlwRw.png)

**Meta AI-generated imagery, showcasing a car from the future capable of
being a theater, a community center, a haven, and a transformable
flatbed for construction work.**

## 1.1 Executive Summary

Vehicles since World War 1 haven't fundamentally changed till now. Aside
from safety upgrades and creature comforts such as heated seats the car
fundamentally drives on the same ICE (Internal Combustion Engine)
technology. Now, however, with the advent of ADAS (Advanced Driver
Assistance Systems) and batteries powering up our drives, the car is
getting a revamp. The pace of acceleration is ever-increasing courtesy
of players such as

and

. However, what has also risen is the cost of ownership, with the
average American saving for [**almost 42
weeks**](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/average-american-spends-much-car-120017501.html).
Our product vision considers needs arising in the market that will shape
tomorrow's car with the underlying intent of making cars more
affordable, valuable, and accessible for all.

## 1.2 Introduction

It's going to distributed computing cluster and mobile towers that will
have no fixed ownership model with different components for rent or sale
throughout its lifecycle. Or maybe not?

It was early afternoon, there was Pizza on the side table and the team
huddled around the conference room with
[Bonny](https://www.linkedin.com/in/bonnyphilip/) on the screen joining
virtually. It was our first conversation with the P99 Labs team sitting
across the table on a rather abstract question. How will the car in 15
years work? What would it look like? We knew the automotive field was
evolving at a shocking pace thanks to Tesla making electric vehicles
common with their supercharger network and the world setting deadlines
for migrating to electric vehicles but akin to the jump from bulky
handheld phones that could barely text in the 1990s to the powerful
Samsungs and iPhones of today, we knew cars themselves would evolve as a
product. The question remained how?

> *Like all innovation, there is a need that drives it and today's cars
> are riddled with complications. From purchase, performance, and usage
> to disposal, the entire car lifecycle has challenges that create
> opportunities to make getting around a better experience.*

## 1.3 Refresher on the auto industry

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/1*VfjzwJzD11XoNBoTpRDLmg.png)

**The Model N on the left from 1906 and the Model T on the right from
1925**

Before we begin it is imperative to size down a clear problem statement
of what we wish to prognosticate. One can often use history to gauge
trends, and so we did. What were the key moments in the auto industry,
we asked ourselves and what did they inform us?

1.  **Mass Production and Model T (Post 1908)\
    **Ford revolutionized the industry with the introduction of the
    Model T, which was the first automobile produced using assembly line
    techniques. This innovation dramatically reduced the cost of
    manufacturing, making cars more affordable and accessible to the
    general public. To put things in perspective the best-selling car
    before the model T was the model N with 7000 made. By the end over
    15,000,000 model Ts had been made.\
    **Key Learning:** Continued emphasis on efficient manufacturing
    processes, automation, and economies of scale will always play a
    crucial role.
2.  **The rise of the Japanese automotive Industry's rise (1970s through
    80s)\
    **Toyota, Honda, and Nissan introduced high-quality, fuel-efficient,
    and reliable cars that captured a substantial market share
    worldwide. This period saw the emergence of Japanese manufacturing
    principles like "Just-In-Time" production and Total Quality
    Management, influencing manufacturing practices globally.\
    **Key Learning:** Global competition and innovation will remain key
    drivers in the industry.
3.  **The Electric Vehicle Revolution (Post 2003)**\
    We saw a growing emphasis on sustainability and environmental
    concerns with Tesla, founded in 2003, played a pivotal role in
    popularizing electric cars and challenging traditional automotive
    norms. The vehicles augmented with self-driving capabilities on
    marked freeways and their charging network are changing the status
    quo of how a car operates.\
    **Key Learning:** Innovation at its heart is driven by economic
    realities and consumer needs. Higher efficient systems with reduced
    cost of ownership will trump existing inefficiencies in the market.

**Despite the shell and features evolving over the last century, the car
ownership and operations model has stayed pretty much the same. The most
exciting advancement that has occurred is the financing and leasing
options of the 2000s.**

## 1.4 First Principles

The odd thing about predicting the car of the future was every major
automotive brand in the world saw the evolution of the car their way.
[BMW](https://www.bmw.com/en/innovation/car-of-the-future.html)
presented it as the meeting spot for friends, while
[Audi](https://www.progress.audi/progress/en/concept-cars/audi-skysphere-concept.html)
presented it as the default choice of travel for its comfort and
convenience, and others presented the no-ownership model where a car
wasn't owned but rented for use throughout its life. These visions
albeit interesting were insufficient in solving our problem since they
were centered around branding and not market needs.

We needed to ground our ideas in facts and trends like true business
students, being design-centric alone would be too pedantic after all.
Being students of Carnegie Mellon having been instructed with frameworks
upon frameworks we decided to discard them and start with a first
principles approach.

The only issue was between
[Eshaan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/eshaanrampal/) and me
([Arjun](https://www.linkedin.com/in/arjunsinghkumar/)) there were two
sets of first principles; the first was a bottom-up approach to break
down the car into its components and figure out what alternate use cases
we could come up with for each part.

The other included looking at the various needs and opportunities that
existed in the current automotive model from ownership to usage and
disposal. We decided to go forward with both and use the overlap of the
two analyses to come up with a comprehensive solution.

Based on the two approaches, we would get a bird's eye view of our
playing field, but adding constraints was equally important. We went
through research papers ¹ ² ³ that presented the potential adoption of
Autonomous vehicles in 15 years, the likely wattage of power generated
by vehicles, and even the computing resources available at the time to
finally constrain our imagination. These constraints include identifying
the current resources and using known growth multipliers to estimate the
potential resource cap each vehicle carried.

We forecasted based on current trends, that a fully autonomous vehicle
might consume upwards of 840W an hour and produce over a TB of data in a
30-minute drive while having low latency network connectivity sharing
data in speeds \>3GBps.

## 1.5 Derived insights

**Americans spend around 10% of their annual income on gas and
vehicles⁶, a depreciating liability that is used for less than 11 hours
a week ⁷ and this cost of ownership and maintenance is touted to keep
increasing.**

1.  The car in 15, is going to be much more expensive due to its
    automation sophistication. It will consequently have a much higher
    burden on its owner. In 2012, the cost of the average car was USD
    30k, while a decade later it stands at USD 48k, a staggering 60%
    increase in a decade. If this trend continues the car is going to
    continue to become out of reach for more and more Americans.
2.  The vehicle itself is underutilized. We understand free markets move
    towards higher efficiencies. A 95% wastage is inefficient for the
    end consumer as well as from a resource standpoint. Take data, a
    small subset of the resource available as an example. An assessment
    of sensor data provided us insight into the sheer magnitude of
    direct and indirect data being generated, portions of which could be
    sold to the right buyer.
3.  The current subsidy for electric vehicles will reduce as ownership
    rates climb, reducing the monetary offset over gasoline. With more
    vehicles being plugged into the grid, the effective running costs
    will spike too. Teslas till 2018 were charged basically for free,
    but with better adoptions, these subsidies stopped.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/1*M0eOT-fGivE8OChoWuq2OQ.png)

**Car from Future by Meta AI. We asked it to make it unaffordable and
expensive to run. This looks pretty but not for the common man.**

## 2.0 Vision 2035

## 2.1 What \$AAPL got right but \$BB and \$NOK didn't

As [Adri](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adrimr) rightly noted this last
piece is important for you to understand our choices ahead. How does a
400\$ Nokia (the 1990s) barely capable of sending text turn into the
mail and an internet-powered BlackBerry (the 2000s) which then turns
into the 1100\$ iPhone 14 Pro Max (post 2010s) capable of shooting 4K
videos live and mapping 3D models using LiDar sensors? Three factors.

1.  **Technological advancement and sensor integration**\
    The improvements in silicon for computing performance and efficiency
    provided infrastructure for more complex and intensive applications.
    More sensors unlocked use cases traditionally reserved for
    specialized devices. The fact the phone has become a credit card
    (NFC), a camera, and a navigation device (GPS) replacing 10s of
    devices is living proof of this trend.\
    **Key Learning:** Develop the infrastructure of the vehicle in a
    manner that provides for newer use cases and helps absorb alternate
    vehicles. The Ford F150 is used to tow, perform farming tasks, and
    carry loads is what made it ubiquitous as the multi-utility vehicle
    in agro, construction, and maintenance.
2.  **App Ecosystems and Developer Innovation\
    **Have you heard the phrase, I have an idea for an app? Which
    historically was, I have an idea for a company. The shift in the
    accessibility of developing apps to create businesses is a direct
    outcome of incentivizing partners in the platform ecosystem. A
    company can either make one thing well or a lot of things kind of
    well. The beauty of incentivizing others to come up with ideas and
    undertake their development allows companies to explore a much wider
    search space at a fraction of the cost. By incentivizing others to
    build atop your infrastructure the platform becomes more valuable
    with more users, which in turn incentivizes more people to develop.
    The positive feedback loop created is the key driver of innovation.\
    **Key Learning:** Make sure to incentivize players to build atop
    your infrastructure and develop a platform that allows more and more
    people to try out new business models.
3.  **User Adoption and Cultural Shift\
    **The market itself has had to evolve in its usage as a result of
    this. Selfies, social media, and mobile gaming are all emergent
    trends from smartphone adoption. The entire gig economy that came up
    was the outcome of the smartphone being owned by virtually every
    single one of us.\
    **Key Learning:** Ensure to promote the proponents of adoption and
    growth in the developed platform. Being aware of evolving habits and
    usage can help position the platform closer to user needs.

We wanted to use a similar framework because we see a parallel between
the advancement of phones and cars. It's not so much so the car is an
iPad with wheels, but it does have resources with fantastic potential
use cases that can only be explored by incentivizing developers to come
together and try out new business models and ideas.

## 2.2 Car today, market tomorrow

The reason for the exponential increase in functionality of the
smartphone was not Steve Jobs carefully identifying user patterns from
every activity a human can do and augmenting it with technology. That
approach is great when the need is specific but when developing the
vision for the future of a platform it has to be so much more than that.
It's similar to building a city as a planner. You don't need to say
where UPMC will be set up and where Target will be set up, but you need
to provide space for people to buy groceries and get treatment. **This
is similar in the sense we know what can be put up for usage, rent, and
purchase inside a car but we don't know exactly how.** It is also
impractical to say in one iteration I would go to this utopian
distributed ownership model of a car where its components are up for
rent by whoever requires it.

**A more iterative process where value is created and systematically
sold to potential buyers and where a 3rd party develops the use case is
more likely to bear fruit as it reduces the burden of developing the
right product on the manufacturer who is already burdened with creating
and selling cars. This model is a mirror of the app stores we see on the
iOS and Android Platforms.**

## 2.3 Components in the Marketplace

**The underlying theme of the marketplace is to provide earning
opportunities to the end owners of their cars.**

We perceive the vehicle as a layered entity. At its core are systems
(foundational layer) that work together to perform a task (capability
layer) which can then be used to provide a service.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/0*v9ShiHwUP85A6_oO)

**A layered view of the Platform showcasing how services can be built
atop existing capabilities and infrastructure**

Let's visualize this stack with the example of a current self-driving
taxi such as

using Jaguar cars.

**Infrastructure Layer** --- Cameras, Compute, Networks, LiDAR, and
Actuators collect information, process it, and provide inputs to
steering, braking, and Motors. Deciding what goes into this layer is the
most important decision for the auto manufacturer (Jaguar) to make.
Whether the car should have expanded storage, advanced sensors, or
removable battery packs which can give rise to a host of services is a
calculated decision that has to be made keeping in mind evolving market
trends and user needs.

**Capability Layer ---** The above systems work together to perceive the
environment (Computer Vision), and make decisions on how to drive
(Autonomous Decision Making) and these systems work together to give us
the umbrella capability of Autonomous Driving. This layer could fall
under the purview of the auto manufacturer (Jaguar) or the 3rd party (

). Access to a car's networking components can provide the creation of
new capabilities such as mobile hotspots which businesses such as

can leverage to create low-cost mobile networks.

**Service Layer ---** This layer is the exposed business layer of the
marketplace. Its primary objective is to leverage the lower foundational
and capability layers to provide a service. **This is the layer where
the money lies.**

can use the infrastructure provided by Jaguar Cars to create distributed
taxi services that can earn for them.

## 2.4 Incentivising the right outcome

> Show me the incentive, and I will show you the outcome \~Charlie
> Munger

Like all businesses, this marketplace is an exchange of services for
money, with three players involved. The auto manufacturing company that
develops the marketplace, the 3rd party that uses the cars for providing
services and generating revenue, and the car owners who create income
for themselves. The automotive company sits in between as the mediator
paying out to customers and pulling in the revenue from 3rd parties.

**The issue? It's cumbersome to keep paying out to customers for
individual transactions since the effective revenue generated will be
dynamic and contingent on the demand and supply for the service.**

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/0*QjgMP7kaSrBMqmbk)

**The model proposed can leverage new-age currency models like
cryptocurrencies to help both customers and 3rd parties manage
transactions on the platform.**

Consider a car being used for its computing power to develop AI models.
Depending on the number of cars on the network and the demand for
computing power, the payout for the transactions is going to vary.
However, if we set the rate for computing as our own 'credits', the
customer sees a fixed earning for the task performed by their car. By
disentangling the actual earnings from transactions on the customer
side, the auto manufacturers stand to gain two benefits. The cash
reserves of the company increase, since customers find value by not
taking out the credits (much like rewards in credit cards), and secondly
the earnings to the customers can be quantified more consistently and
interpreted more easily.

## 2.5 Building a marketplace in steps

The marketplace development is divided into stages depending on the
level of access a non-owner is being given over the vehicle. These
access rights are similar to security privileges given over a device ie:
a read mode, a write mode, and an administration mode with each layer
providing access to more resources to work with.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:500/0*zX-hMf35d3G6fl0-.jpg)

Because increased access can bring both benefits and risks to the end
user, the platform is structured to prioritize the implementation of
important features in later stages. This approach allows for the
establishment of robust policies, mechanisms, and regulations to ensure
user safety. It's important to note that in the earlier stages of the
platform, where resources may be limited, the percentage of revenue
distributed to the end user might be lower, but this is balanced by the
potential for higher returns as the platform develops further.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/1*XzI5Mxl9n1ywJfNqyu5IwQ.png)

## 2.61 Phase 1 --- Access

The first phase of the platform marketplace is to provide access to
sensor and telemetry data. This is also the stage where we get the
development program up and running. This includes setting up the APIs,
and JDKs that will be exposed to developers. This stage is characterized
by developing low access and low reward use cases.

Let us consider a use case to better understand how this phase works.

## eg: Hypermiling

In keeping with the original objective, to lower the cost of car
ownership, we looked at forums, blogs, and YouTube videos and found that
Hypermiling was a popular concept in directly reducing fuel bills. Users
went as far as avoiding A/C, forced auto stop (FAS), using low friction
tires, and using heater seats instead of car heaters, during winters.
Eventually, we solidified the concept of Hypermiling to be a real-time
navigation interface, suggesting routes that promise both immediate and
long-term cost benefits. Hypermiling was not just another navigation app
but an experience built atop it.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/0*q9WFpEXwwiEI80ko)

Our options ranged from integrating Hypermiling into a native mapping
solution to partnering with existing navigation applications like Google
Maps, HERE Maps, or Waze within a B2B marketplace.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/0*MjkiMMGMNTUtFJ7U)

**High-Level Design of a Hypermiling service.**

The goal is to reduce the cost of car ownership. One of the solutions
evaluated was to reduce fuel bills by maximizing fuel efficiency. To
achieve the same we gathered telemetry data available from the car and
mapped it to features it could support. Some of the proposed features
are alternate routes, driving style, speed to reduce energy cost,
driving style and speed to extend maintenance schedules, suggesting
routes with cheaper charging locations, and routes that help to extend
battery life. Eventually, we solidified the concept of Hypermiling to be
a real-time navigation interface, suggesting routes that promise both
immediate and long-term cost benefits.

## 2.62 Phase 2 --- Borrow

The second phase of the marketplace is to allow 3rd parties to borrow
compute, battery, and network resources. This phase has more
opportunities for returns owing to the greater access being provided to
developers.

Let us visualize a potential use case in this stage, Cluster computing.

## eg: Cluster Computing

The progression of computational power in pursuit of autonomous vehicles
opens up the possibility of cars functioning as affordable, virtual
machines accessible to anyone. This is particularly advantageous for
researchers and tech startups with limited resources, eliminating the
need to invest in costly computing resources or cloud services. The
computational capabilities of a car can cater to various needs,
including data analysis, machine learning model training, and scalable
simulation and testing.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/0*n6DVhgT4kw3oTRGU)

**Value flow that we envisioned could happen in a compute power
marketplace ecosystem**

From a B2B perspective, tapping into the lucrative and high-margin
business of computing services, cloud providers can explore cars as a
more cost-effective, short-term product offering compared to traditional
server racks. Looking ahead, with the widespread availability of very
low latency and high-bandwidth networks, a network of cars could serve
as a grid computing network. This expansion of computing capabilities
opens doors for diverse applications, such as complex AI algorithms and
processing consensus/validation tasks in blockchain.

## 2.63 Phase 3--- Use

This is the most ambitious stage of the marketplace with the intent of
effectively setting up the car for whatever is required by the business
model and compensating the owner the best. However,
[Charu](https://www.linkedin.com/in/charu-dixit/) rightly had concerns
about the implications of such deep integration. Since this layer has
deep access to the core systems of the vehicle it poses safety risks to
the end users, due to which it needs strong guardrails for its
development and testing.

## eg: Dynamic Shared Mobility

The primary aim is to empower vehicle owners to capitalize on unused
commuting time or periods when their vehicles are idle. By doing so, we
envision the creation of a vibrant, interconnected mobility network that
enhances the overall efficiency of transportation services. This network
would enable owners to seamlessly offer rides during their daily
commutes or whenever their vehicles are not actively utilized, fostering
a dynamic and mutually beneficial system.

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:700/1*367RLz7aI6ghi9GdEJZa8w.png)

**In a distributed mobility platform, when you're at work, your car is
moving goods and people leading to better utilization and lower cost of
ownership.**

Through this initiative, we aspire to unlock the full potential of
shared mobility, allowing owners to generate additional income while
contributing to the development of a more interconnected and accessible
transportation network.

## 3.0 Conclusion

In conclusion, the automotive industry is on the cusp of significant
transformation, moving beyond the traditional Internal Combustion Engine
(ICE) technology. The emergence of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
(ADAS), coupled with the increasing influence of electric vehicles, is
reshaping the landscape. However, this evolution comes with challenges,
particularly the rising cost of ownership, putting a strain on
consumers. The historical analysis underscores the importance of
efficient manufacturing processes and global competition in shaping the
industry.

Looking ahead to Vision 2035, the blueprint involves treating vehicles
as multi-layered platforms, with components available for rent or sale.
By incentivizing developers and fostering an app ecosystem, the aim is
to unlock the full potential of cars, mirroring the success seen in
smartphones. The proposed marketplace envisions stages of access, from
data sharing to resource borrowing and, ultimately, deep integration for
various business models. The strategy of compensating owners for unused
commuting time exemplifies the goal of creating a dynamic and mutually
beneficial transportation network. Through this approach, the vision is
to make future cars more affordable, valuable, and aligned with evolving
market needs.
